# omicron-uuid-kinds

In omicron and other Oxide projects, we use UUIDs to identify many different
kinds of entities. Using a single `Uuid` type for all of them risks mixing up
all the different kinds of IDs.

To address that, we're actively moving towards typed UUIDs with the
https://github.com/oxidecomputer/newtype-uuid[newtype-uuid] crate. The goal is
that each kind of entity will have a marker type representing a _UUID kind_
associated with it. Then, the type system will make it significantly harder to
mix different kinds of entities.

*`omicron-uuid-kinds` is a centralized registry for UUID kinds*, one that can
be shared across Oxide repos. `omicron-uuid-kinds` supports no-std so the kinds
can be shared with embedded code as well.

## Adding a new UUID kind

Start by adding a new element to the invocation of the `impl_typed_uuid_kind!` macro in `src/lib.rs`. For example:

[source,rust]
```
impl_typed_uuid_kind! {
    // ...
    Widget => "widget",
    // ...
}
```

This will:

- Create a new `TypedUuidKind` called `WidgetKind`. This kind will become the type parameter to `TypedUuid` and other related generic types.
- Create a type alias `type WidgetUuid = TypedUuid<WidgetKind>`.

Then, start changing your UUID types over. It's generally easiest to change the type of a UUID in a struct or enum field, and start pulling that thread.

- If your UUID isn't used in too many places, you can usually just change all users in one go. For an example, see the conversions of several UUID types in https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/pull/5135[#5135].

- If your UUID is widely used, you may need to break your change up across several commits. It's easiest to carve out a section of your code to make changes in, and use the `GenericUuid` conversions into and out of this code. For an example, see the ongoing conversion for sled UUIDs in https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/pull/5404[#5404] and https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/pull/5488[#5488].

Some special cases:

. If part of your change is at an OpenAPI schema boundary, then you generally also want to have clients use the same UUID types. The best way to do that currently is to use a `replace` directive, as in https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/pull/5135[#5135]. There is ongoing design work to make this work automatically, in https://github.com/oxidecomputer/typify/issues/503[typify#503] and elsewhere.

. For Nexus database storage, `nexus-db-model` has a `DbTypedUuid` generic type which can be used. `DbTypedUuid` should not be exposed outside of `nexus-db-model`; instead, prefer to use the regular `TypedUuid` and only convert to `DbTypedUuid` within the lowest layers (i.e. using getters/setters and not making it a public field). This is because the regular `TypedUuid` has much more infrastructure built around it.

## Determinations

As part of this effort, we've made several decisions that could have gone a
different way. This section documents those choices.

### One big registry or several smaller ones?

Rather than having a single registry, an option is to have several smaller ones
(perhaps one to two in each repo). The best answer to that is currently
unclear, but putting them in the same crate for now has several advantages:

* The macros updated in this PR know where uuid kinds will be found, so they
let you specify just a bare name as the kind.

* It's simpler.

The disadvantage of this is that any change to this registry will cause all of
omicron to be rebuilt. Hopefully, once most UUIDs are converted over, this
crate won't be touched too much.

This decision involves some level of commitment, because splitting up a
registry will probably require several days of work. For example, macros may
need to be updated to handle multiple sources, import paths would have to be
changed across several repos, and so on.

Crates which solve more abstract problems and are completely independent of
omicron, like https://github.com/oxidecomputer/dropshot/[Dropshot] and
https://github.com/oxidecomputer/steno[Steno], will have their own registries
(probably as a module within the crates themselves).

### Where should the registry live?

Once we've decided on a single registry, the next question is where this
registry should be stored. There was some debate in `#oxide-control-plane`, and
two options stood out:

1. In omicron itself.

    * The upside of this is that it is easy to add new UUID kinds within
      omicron, especially as we transition over existing untyped UUIDs.

    * The downside is that we also want to use these kinds in crucible and
      propolis -- and pulling in `omicron-uuid-kinds` as a Git dependency would
      typically cause two copies of `omicron-uuid-kinds` to be floating around.
      That can result in a lot of pain, including confusing errors.

2. In a separate repo. While it eliminates the issue with duplicated
dependencies, it does add a fair bit more friction. That's because users
updating omicron would now have to make two separate, coordinated PRs.

We've chosen 1 for now, because agility within omicron outweighs other
concerns. *The downside is mitigated* by using a `[patch]` directive; see the
workspace root's `Cargo.toml` for more about this.

This is straightforward to change in the future. If we find that 1 is too much
of a bother, we'll easily be able to switch to 2 while keeping the name of the
crate the same (minimizing churn).
